śakreṇa saṃyati hato'pi balirmahātmā
śukreṇa jīvitatanu: kratuvardhitoṣmā |
vikrāntimān bhayanilīnasurāṃ trilokīṃ
cakre vaśe sa tava cakramukhādabhīta: ||1||
śakreṇa saṃyati hata:-api	by Indra, in the battle even though killed
bali:-mahātmā	Bali, the high souled
śukreṇa jīvita-tanu:	by Shukraachaarya was revived whose body
kratu-vardhita-uṣmā	and whose strength had increased by performing Vishwajit Yagna
vikrāntimān	valorous (Bali)
bhaya-nilīna-surāṃ	the Devas having hidden due to fear
trilokīṃ	in the three worlds
cakre vaśe sa	he conquered (the three worlds)
tava cakra-mukhāt-abhīta:	he who was, of the striking of Thy discus not afraid of
The high souled Bali was killed in the battle by Indra, but his body was revived by Shukraachaarya. By performing the Vishwajit Sacrifice he grew in prowess and being a descendent of Prahlaad, he was not afraid of Thy discus. So Devas had to flee in fear of the victorious Bali who conquered the three worlds where the Devas had hid themselves.
putrārtidarśanavaśādaditirviṣaṇṇā
taṃ kāśyapaṃ nijapatiṃ śaraṇaṃ prapannā |
tvatpūjanaṃ taduditaṃ hi payovratākhyaṃ
sā dvādaśāhamacarattvayi bhaktipūrṇā ||2||
putra-ārti-darśana-vaśāt-	the plight of her sons seeing
aditi-viṣaṇṇā	Aditi was tormented
taṃ kāśyapaṃ nija-patiṃ	to Kaashyapa, her husband, approached
śaraṇaṃ prapannā	for help
tvat-pūjanaṃ tat-uditaṃ	Thy worship, as advised by him
hi payovrata-ākhyaṃ	indeed known as Payovrata
sā dvādaśa-āham-acarat-	she, for twelve days performed
tvayi bhakti-pūrṇā	to Thee full of devotion
Aditi was very much tormented on seeing the plight of her sons the Devas. She approached her husband Kaashyapa for help. He advised her to observe the Payovrata worship unto Thee. She performed it for twelve days with full devotion to Thee.
tasyāvadhau tvayi nilīnamateramuṣyā:
śyāmaścaturbhujavapu: svayamāvirāsī: |
namrāṃ ca tāmiha bhavattanayo bhaveyaṃ
gopyaṃ madīkṣaṇamiti pralapannayāsī: ||3||
tasya-avadhau	at the end of the (worship)
tvayi nilīna-mate:-amuṣyā:	whose mind was fixed on Thee, in front of her
śyāma:-caturbhuja-vapu:	with a blue complexion and a four armed form
svayam-āvirāsī:	Thou Thyself manifested
namrāṃ ca tām-iha	as she was bowing to Thee, here, to her
bhavat-tanaya: bhaveyaṃ	'I shall be born as your son
gopyaṃ mat-īkṣaṇam-iti	secret may my meeting be', thus
pralapan	saying
ayāsī:	Thou disappeared
At the end of the worship, Thou with four arms and blue complexion appeared in front of her whose mind was fixed on Thee.There , at that moment, when she was bowing to Thee, Thou told her that Thou would be born as her son. Thou also charged her to let the meeting be a secret and then Thou disappeared.
tvaṃ kāśyape tapasi sannidadhattadānīṃ
prāpto'si garbhamadite: praṇuto vidhātrā |
prāsūta ca prakaṭavaiṣṇavadivyarūpaṃ
sā dvādaśīśravaṇapuṇyadine bhavantaṃ ||4||
tvaṃ	Thou
kāśyape tapasi	in Kaasyapa the sage
sannidadhat-	entered (in seed form)
tadānīṃ	at that time
prāpta:-asi	did enter
garbham-adite:	in the womb of Aditi
praṇuta: vidhātrā	(and Thou were) praised by Brahmaa
prāsūta ca	and (she Aditi) gave birth (to Thee) to
prakaṭa-vaiṣṇava-divya-rūpaṃ	with evident marks of Vishnu, a divine form
sā	she
dvādaśī-śravaṇa-puṇya-dine	on the confluence of Dvaadashi and Shraavana, the sacred days
bhavantam	Thee
Then placing Thyself in Kaashyapa's austerity bourn seed, Thou entered into Aditi's womb. Praised by Brahmaa Thou were delivered as a divine child with evident marks of Vishnu's glory, on the auspicious day of the confluence of Dvaadashi and Shraavana Nakshatra.
puṇyāśramaṃ tamabhivarṣati puṣpavarṣai-
rharṣākule suragaṇe kṛtatūryaghoṣe |
badhvā'ñjaliṃ jaya jayeti nuta: pitṛbhyāṃ
tvaṃ tatkṣaṇe paṭutamaṃ vaṭurūpamādhā: ||5||
puṇya-āśramaṃ tam-	that holy hermitage
abhivarṣati puṣpa-varṣai:-	(when It was) being showered with flowers
harṣa-ākule suragaṇe	by the Devas who were full of great joy
kṛta-tūrya-ghoṣe	and were sounding the trumpets
badhvā-añjaliṃ	with folded hands
jaya jaya iti	Hail,hail', thus
nuta: pitṛbhyāṃ	saluted by Thy parents
tvaṃ tat-kṣaṇe	Thou immediately
paṭutamaṃ vaṭu-rūpam-	a talented and handsome Brahmachaarin form
ādhā:	(Thou) assumed
The Devas in great joy were showering flowers on that hermitage where Thou were born and were blowing trumpets. Thy Parents were praising Thee with folded hands, just then Thou took on the form of a talented handsome Brahmachaarin.
tāvatprajāpatimukhairupanīya mauñjī-
daṇḍājinākṣavalayādibhirarcyamāna: |
dedīpyamānavapurīśa kṛtāgnikārya-
stvaṃ prāsthithā baligṛhaṃ prakṛtāśvamedham ||6||
tāvat-	then
prajāpatimukhai:-	by Prajaapati Kaashyapa and others
upanīya	being adorned with
mauñjī-daṇḍa-ajina-akṣa-valaya-ādibhi:-	the sacred thread, staff, deer skin, a garland of beads etc.,
arcyamāna:	and being worshipped
dedīpyamāna-vapu:-	with a resplendent form
īśa	O Lord!
kṛta-agni-kārya:-	having performed the rites with the sacred fire
tvaṃ	Thou
prāsthithā	departed for
bali-gṛhaṃ	Bali's house
prakṛta-aśva-medham	where, was being performed the Ashvamedha Yanjya
Kaashyapa Prajaapati and others adorned Thee with the sacred thread, staff, deer skin, and a garland of beads. O Lord! Being conferred upon, and worshipped,Thou performed the rites with the sacred fire and with Thy resplendent form departed for the house of Bali where the Ashvamedha Yanjya was being performed.
gātreṇa bhāvimahimocitagauravaṃ prā-
gvyāvṛṇvateva dharaṇīṃ calayannāyāsī: |
chatraṃ paroṣmatiraṇārthamivādadhāno
daṇḍaṃ ca dānavajaneṣviva sannidhātum ||7||
gātreṇa	with (Thy) body
bhāvi-mahimā-ucita-gauravaṃ	subsequent (manifestation of the ) might befitting the majesty
prāk-	beforehand (in advance)
vyāvṛṇvatā-iva	as if showing
dharaṇīṃ calayan-	shaking the earth
āyāsī:	(Thou) went
chatraṃ	the umbrella (holding)
para-uṣmati-raṇa-artham-iva	as if to ward off the heat of aggressiveness of all opponents
ādadhāna:	holding
daṇḍaṃ ca	the staff also
dānava-janeṣu-iva	on the Asura people as though
sannidhātum	to apply
As Thou marched forth, Thy body's weight shook the earth, indicating the subsequent manifestation of the might befitting the majesty. Thou held an umbrella as if to ward off the heat of the aggressiveness of all opponents, and carried a staff as though to apply it on the Asura people.
tāṃ narmadottarataṭe hayamedhaśālā-
māseduṣi tvayi rucā tava ruddhanetrai: |
bhāsvān kimeṣa dahano nu sanatkumāro
yogī nu ko'yamiti śukramukhaiśśaśaṅke ||8||
tāṃ	that
narmadā-uttarataṭe	on the northern bank of the Narmadaa (river)
hayamedha-śālām-	(that) venue of the Ashvamedha Yanjya
āseduṣi tvayi	when Thou reached
rucā tava	by Thy brilliance
ruddha-netrai:	with their eyes dazzled
bhāsvān kim-eṣa	Is this Sun?'
dahana: nu	or Agni?'
sanatkumāra: yogī nu	or Yogi Sanatkumaara?'
ka:-ayam-iti	who is this?'
śukramukhai:-	by Shukra and others
śaśaṅke	it was doubted
Thou reached the venue of the Ashvamedha Yanjya on the northern bank of the Narmadaa river. By Thy brilliance the eyes of Shukra and others were dazzled and they wondered if it was the Sun or Agni or the Sage Sanat Kumaara, who was he?
ānītamāśu bhṛgubhirmahasā'bhibhūtai-
stvāṃ ramyarūpamasura: pulakāvṛtāṅga: |
bhaktyā sametya sukṛtī pariṇijya pādau
tattoyamanvadhṛta mūrdhani tīrthatīrtham ||9||
ānītam-āśu	received (and admitted) quickly
bhṛgubhi:-	by Shukraachaarya and others
mahasā-abhibhūtai:-	very much overwhelmed by Thy majestic and charming form
tvāṃ ramyarūpam-	Thee of charming appearance
asura: pulaka-āvṛta-aṅga:	the Asura Bali with a thrilled body
bhaktyā sametya	with devotion approached
sukṛtī	who had done noble deeds
pariṇijya pādau	washed Thy feet
tat-toyam-anvadhṛta	and that water sprinkled
mūrdhani	on his head
tīrtha-tīrtham	the holiest of the holy (water)
Bhrigu and others who were overwhelmed by Thy majestic charm received Thee quickly. The thrilled Asura Bali, with devotion, approached Thee of charming appearance. Asura Bali, who had done noble deeds, washed Thy feet and sprinkled that holiest of the holy waters on his head.
prahlādavaṃśajatayā kratubhirdvijeṣu
viśvāsato nu tadidaṃ ditijo'pi lebhe |
yatte padāmbu giriśasya śirobhilālyaṃ
sa tvaṃ vibho gurupurālaya pālayethā: ||10||
prahlāda-vaṃśajatayā	in the line of Prahlaad being born
kratubhi:-	having performed sacrifices
dvijeṣu viśvāsata: nu	or because of his faith in holy men
tat-idaṃ	that this
dtija:-api lebhe	the son of Diti (the Asura Bali) also got
yat-te pada-ambu	that water from Thy feet
giriśasya śira:-abhilālyaṃ	which is meant to sanctify the head of Shiva
sa tvaṃ vibho	That Thou O Lord!
gurupura-ālaya	who resides in Guruvaayur
pālayethā	please protect me
The son of Diti, the Asura Bali, was very fortunate, by the glory of being born in the line of Prahlaad, or by having performed sacrifices,or by his faith in and service to holy men, to get this holy water from Thy feet. O Lord! This water is meant to sanctify Shiva's head. O Thou! Who resides in Guruvaayur! please protect me.